Model Summary

Muni Loss Forecasts are quarterly, scenario-conditioned, probability of default and loss-rate forecasts for U.S. municipal institutions given a hypothetical economic scenario. A motivation for their development is the U.S. adoption of current expected credit loss (CECL) accounting standards that focus on estimation of expected losses over the life of the loans, while the previous standard relied on incurred losses.

Introduction

Moody's Investors Service has developed a model to forecast the probability of default and loss rate for U.S. municipal institutions given a hypothetical economic scenario. This model can be used for stress-testing purposes and portfolio risk evaluation by asset managers who employ scenario analysis.

Data

The data used in the model is composed of actual historical (1970-2017) rating records directly from the source and was checked for outliers and potential errors.

Municipal Debt

We draw historical information on municipal PDs and LRs from a unique dataset covering the full universe of muni ratings actions by management information systems (MIS). The data shows that the U.S. municipal market is highly active and disaggregated, both by type of issuer and by type of security. 
Rated Muni bonds were grouped into 11 sectors, including airports, healthcare, higher education, housing, local governments, not-for-profit, ports, public power, states, toll facilities, and water & sewer. General government includes state and local governments, special districts, and tax-backed hospital and community college districts. It issues a municipal bond backed solely by the credit and taxing power of the issuing jurisdiction rather than the revenue from a given project (Obligation Bond), secured by its full faith and credit. 
Municipal utilities provide essential services with a monopoly or near-monopoly over the service. They typically have no taxing power and issue debt to customers.
Municipal bonds tend to be highly rated compared to their corporate counterparts because local governments tend to be long-lived with little private competition and generous taxation powers. However, competitive enterprises (covering not-for-profit enterprises that provide an important public function) have a far more noticeable presence in higher default risk territory (speculative grade) relative to municipal utilities.
The recent trend of speculative grade rated bonds is worth noting, as is the trend of muni defaults.
2.1.2. Data Outlier: Great rating migration of 2010
MIS recalibrated its U.S. municipal bond ratings to its Global Rating Scale beginning in mid-April 2010 . This resulted in an outsize number of rating actions being recorded for this period.
2.1.3. Data Assumptions and Limitations
Developing a dependent variable dataset for municipal default probabilities was less straight-forward than for other asset classes owing to the lack of historical defaults in the rated municipal bond market. The first step in the model development process was identifying an appropriate method of mapping credit ratings to expected probabilities of default.
Corporate default histories are a good but not perfect proxy for municipal default rates, even when controlling for credit ratings on the Global Ratings Scale.
Moody's Investors Service published a study on corporate and municipal bond defaults and recoveries in 2018 and converted some observations to alpha scale.
The Muni Loss Forecast model relies on idealized default rates from MIS to benchmark against historical corporate ratings. These assumptions will be continually monitored and reexamined in future model updates.
The idealized values are within the average observed muni and corporate rate ranges, except for Ba and B, where the idealized rate is above the average observed corporate rate.
The mapping was done using the 1-yr PD values from the Idealized Table. The historical variation in ratings was used to generate as closely as possible scenario-conditioned PIT estimates based on macroeconomic drivers.
2.1.3.2. Backfilling data
MIS continuously monitors each rated issuer and issues ratings actions only if it has reason to believe that a borrower's creditworthiness has changed based on underlying fundamentals.
The high yield categories tend to be sparsely populated due to the high credit quality present in the muni sector. This results in a lack of historical observations for lower rated bonds.
2.2. Economic data 
All of our economic explanatory variables are obtained from Moody's Analytics Economic Forecast & Historical Databases. These databases supply the macroeconomic and financial market drivers that the Muni Loss Forecast model links to municipal credit risk. Economic forecasts are produced using large structural models that are checked for accuracy, completeness, auditability, timeliness and consistency.
3. Model Design
Moody's Analytics developed the Muni Loss Forecast model to help banks, insurance companies and asset managers assess the credit risk of their steadily rising muni bond holdings under hypothetical economic scenarios.
The Muni Loss Forecast model is composed of two sub-models, which jointly yield a single PD forecast for an entity per scenario. The forecast is based on both the entity's rank in the overall distribution and national macro-drivers. A key assumption of the Muni Loss Forecast model is that credit risk is inversely related to the business cycle. This means that an entity's stressed PD represents the net effect of these two.
3.1 Aggregate-level model  
Discrete segments of the PD distribution are modeled as a function of macroeconomic drivers, and then the full backfilled dataset is collapsed into quartiles. The dependent variable of each quartile equation is defined as the logit of the PD to ensure boundedness between 0 and 1.	 	 	 						
logit PD = In (PD/ (1 - PD ))  (converting data to quartiles )
Although the inclusion of terms in which the current value is based on the immediately preceding value would improve model fit, the inclusion of these terms would crowd out the contribution from the macroeconomic factors, resulting in only mildly stressed PDs even under a severely stressed economic scenario. The aggregate model is based on a set of time-varying macroeconomic drivers, and each quartile equation is based on a different set of drivers. The sector fixed effects are also included in the aggregate model. Factors used in the aggregate model are the change in real per capita GDP, the GDP growth rate, unemployment rate, and the BBB spread. The model employs data from 1970-2017, and accounts for the Great Recession of 2008 and the MIS ratings migration in the second quarter of 2010.		
The exact functional form of each of the quartiles is presented below:				
Minimum: ğ¿ğ‘œğ‘”ğ‘–ğ‘¡ (ğ‘ƒğ·ğ‘šğ‘–ğ‘›) = âˆ’ğ›¥ (ğ‘“ğ‘”ğ‘‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4) ğ›½1 + ğ›¥(ğ‘“ğ‘™ğ‘ğ‘Ÿ. ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4)ğ›½2 âˆ’ ğ‘“ğ‘ğ‘œğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4				
ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦2010ğ›½3 +â„âˆ’ ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦ğ‘†ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘Ÿğ›½4				
25th Quartile: ğ¿ğ‘œğ‘”ğ‘–ğ‘¡ (ğ‘ƒğ·25) = âˆ’ğ›¥ (ğ‘“ğ‘”ğ‘‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4) ğ›½1 âˆ’ ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦2010ğ›½2 +â„âˆ’ ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦ğ‘†ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘Ÿğ›½3 ğ‘“ğ‘ğ‘œğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4	
50th Quartile: ğ¿ğ‘œğ‘”ğ‘–ğ‘¡ (ğ‘ƒğ·50) = âˆ’ğ›¥ (ğ‘“ğ‘”ğ‘‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4) ğ›½1 + (ğ‘“ğ‘™ğ‘ğ‘Ÿ. ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’1)ğ›½2 âˆ’ ğ‘“ğ‘ğ‘œğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4				
ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦2010ğ›½3 +â„âˆ’ ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦ğ‘†ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘Ÿğ›½4					
75th Quartile:ğ¿ğ‘œğ‘”ğ‘–ğ‘¡(ğ‘ƒğ·75)=âˆ’ğ›¥(ğ‘“ğ‘”ğ‘‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4)ğ›½1 +(ğ‘“ğ‘Ÿğ‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡ âˆ’ğ‘“ğ‘Ÿğ‘”ğ‘¡10ğ‘¦.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡)ğ›½2 âˆ’ ğ‘“ğ‘ğ‘œğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’4			
ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦2010ğ›½3 +â„âˆ’ ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦ğ‘†ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘Ÿğ›½4					
Maximum: ğ¿ğ‘œğ‘”ğ‘–ğ‘¡ (ğ‘ƒğ·ğ‘šğ‘ğ‘¥) = âˆ’100 Ã— ( ğ›¥ğ‘“ğ‘”ğ‘‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡ ) ğ›½1 + (ğ‘“ğ‘Ÿğ‘ğ‘ğ‘. ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡ âˆ’ ğ‘“ğ‘Ÿğ‘”ğ‘¡10ğ‘¦. ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡)ğ›½2 âˆ’ ğ‘“ğ‘”ğ‘‘ğ‘ğ‘.ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘ ğ‘ğ‘¡âˆ’1		
ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦2010ğ›½3 +â„âˆ’ ğ·ğ‘¢ğ‘šğ‘šğ‘¦ğ‘†ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘Ÿğ›½4 				
Where PD is the probability of default, fgdpq.iusa/fpopq.iusa is real U.S. GDP per capita, flbr.iusa is the U.S. unemployment rate, frbbq.iusa is the Merrill Lynch 10-Year Bbb corporate bond rate, and frgt10y.iusa is the 10- year constant maturity Treasury rate. The difference between frbbq.iusa and frgt10y.iusa, produces the BBB yield spread. The model also includes two dummy variables. The variable, Dummy2010, indicates whether the observation was in the second quarter of 2010; when the MIS ratings migration occurred. The variable DummySector indicates which of the 11 sectors the observation is in. Logit(PD) is defined as ln(PD/1-PD). 
3.2 Entity-level model  
Time-varying and granular subnational macroeconomic data is used to model credit history of entities, and include a dummy variable for high yield issuers to account for abnormalities associated with the tail end of the ratings distribution.(estimated Eq) lğ‘œğ‘”ğ‘–ğ‘¡ğ‘ƒğ·ğ‘–ğ‘¡ = ğ›¼+ ğ›½ğ‘€ğ‘–ğ‘¡ +ğ›¾ğ¿ğ‘–ğ‘¡ +ğ»ğ‘Œ+ğ·2010 +ğ‘’ğ‘–ğ‘¡				
where issuer is i and time is t. 
 The model includes the probability of default, the median household income, the state unemployment rate, and the number of households. It is autoregressive and includes the previous period's observation for Logit(PD). PD is modelled as a function of individual entities, rather than as a product of macroeconomic or sectoral factors.
3.3 Macroeconomic variable selection 
The selection of macroeconomic drivers for both models was based on a variety of considerations, including the need for a broad factor set, widely used indicators, and a long history. The Muni Loss Forecast model considers macroeconomic risk factors that may impact PD. These factors include growth in real GDP, unemployment, and credit spreads and stock market volatility. Other variables considered but not included in the specifications were house price growth, equity prices, consumer prices, the yield curve, corporate profits, and industrial production.Demand-side indicators such as growth in real GDP are likely to be negatively correlated with PD, since these indicators should improve entity revenues and reduce expenditures. Conversely, a rising unemployment rate, which reflects weak economic conditions, should have a positive impact on PD. Rising credit spreads and rising stock market volatility reflect increased financial market uncertainty and are also likely to impact PD positively, through asset volatility. house price growth, equity prices, consumer prices, the yield curve, corporate profits, and industrial production. These variables were either insignificant; did not have the correct sign; did not add predictive power in the presence of variables such as credit spreads, unemployment or GDP; and/or were found to be too highly correlated with other chosen drivers	
 3.4 Model Fit
While the full output due to the proprietary nature of the model is not disclosed, it is shown that the model is within a good to acceptable range for predicting PDs for aggregate and entity-level models. The entity model is extremely accurate in terms of ratings, hitting about 98% spot on.
3.5 Model Testing 
Standard specification tests for the aggregate and entity-level models are presented, along with an AR (1) contender model. The standard assumptions for the validity of least squares are typically stated to require the model errors to be distributed normally with constant variance. In large samples, the residuals can be skewed, but inferential methods still apply irrespective of the specific residual distribution.
3.5.1. Stationarity
Macroeconomic time series are oftentimes non-stationary and need to be transformed to make them stationary. The ADF(augmented Dickeyâ€“Fuller test (ADF) tests the null hypothesis that a unit root is present in a time series sample) test is often used to distinguish a stationary from a non-stationary series, but has weak power. We do not expect the probability of default data of muni bonds to display non-stationary behavior, except perhaps in the tails of the ratings distribution. We use appropriate transformations for some of the macroeconomic drivers, such as GDP per capita, which has changed significantly over time. The stationarity tests for the Muni Loss Forecast models do not reveal any particularly surprising results. The maximum quantile is more susceptible to movements by individual outliers, but the trend still rejects non-stationarity. For the model drivers, we can reject the null of non-stationarity for variables like GDP and the unemployment rate.For the probability of default series in the aggregate model, we present results of the Im-Pesaran-Shin test, a variation of the ADF test for panel data. For all aggregate U.S. series we present standard ADF results. At the entity level, we present the Im-Pesaran-Shin test for the probability of default as well, aggregated at the state level in the interest of computational efficiency. In each case this covers at least 5 years of data, since the central concern in the context of unit root tests is time period, rather than frequency. We choose five years as a minimum number to eliminate effects induced by the business cycle. For the entity level drivers, we present Im-Pesaran-Shin results at the state level, which is their natural unit of observation. Lag length was generally chosen based on the BIC. For each test, we report results for the untransformed series, alongside the order of integration.
3.5.2. Multicollinearity 
Multicollinearity occurs when two variables are correlated. The individual coefficient estimates may become imprecise, but the joint contribution will still be captured correctly
3.5.3. Heteroscedasticity 
Heteroscedasticity is a concern because it biases coefficient standard errors downward and renders least squares inefficient. We control for heteroscedasticity using robust errors as general practice.
3.5.4 Serial Correlation 
Serial correlation is present when the dependent variable demonstrates a strong propensity over time to be correlated with its value in the prior period. Adding an autoregressive term to boost an equation's Durbin-Watson statistic can have significant unintended consequences. Serial correlation in error terms can cause forecasting issues, but the inclusion of robust errors suggests that the correlation is not significant.
3.5.5. Benchmarking 
Including a lag-dependent variable in the model as presented reduces stress by about half under a moderate recession scenario. Autocorrelation in PDs can cause a bias in OLS coefficients, but we sacrifice some prediction accuracy in favor of having adequate stress in our model outcomes.
3.5.6. Normality 
The residual plots were examined and it was found that the data were not normal, but it is not believed that this renders least squares invalid in the present context.
3.5.7 Sensitivity				
3.5.7.1. Aggregate Level Responses 
To understand the sensitivity of the aggregate model generated PDs, the contribution of each macro driver to stress in the aggregate percentile models was isolated, then the mean PDs from the moderate recession scenario were compared with mean PDs from shock scenarios, and It was found that the change in real per capita GDP has the largest impact on stress across percentiles, and the strongest impact is seen at the 75th percentile. Other drivers have sensible, if quantitatively less pronounced impacts on the aggregate PD distribution.
3.5.7.2. Entity Level Responses 
The entity-level model uses auto-regressive terms and state-specific drivers to forecast stressed Muni PD measures based on Moody's Analytics economic scenarios. The response of the entity-level logit PDs to a one-standard deviation shock to the macroeconomic drivers. The state unemployment rate is the most impactful driver, followed by the median household income ratio and, finally, the household-ratio. All three are highly significant and have the expected signs. 
3.5.8. Out-of-Sample Testing 
For this, the Federal Reserve's CCAR horizon, 20 quarters, and 50 quarters was forecasted. The forecast accuracy was very good to acceptable. Table provides rolling-window-out of sample goodness of fit metrics. For each period, were estimate the model, obtain forecasts for 4, 8 and 12 quarters ahead, and calculate the forecast errors.
4 Projections 
4.1 Stressed PDs 
For this, the results from each of the two sub-models to obtain stressed PD forecasts were combined. Under an adverse economic scenario, issuers A and B may move to different positions in the distribution of PD, depending on their business profiles.
4.1.1 Limitations, Adjustments and Overlays 
Data limitations in certain sectors and states result in a series of adjustments and overlays within the entity-level model. In rare situations, inverted stress scenarios may result from sparsely populated buckets, and these adjustments are best adjusted by overlaying a better behaving estimate. The Muni Loss Forecast methodology is designed to yield highly intuitive and credible estimates of credit risk under alternative economic scenarios but may not perform well when conditioned on poorly specified economic scenarios. Overlays are constructed using average PDs, and the local government sector PD path can be used if the forecast is not behaving in an expected manner. Each entity's stressed PD forecast is calibrated to reflect recent forecast errors and adjust the forecast by this difference going forward.
4.1.2 Mean Reversion 
Mean reversion is imposed on the rating category's forecast at 32 quarters, and the long-term forecast is defined as the average 1-yr PD for the time period between the 24th and 32nd quarters of the forecast. Incorporating the historical average PD was looked at, but it was felt that this was too volatile and may be less reflective of recent history. Instead, the long-term annualized PD was defined as the average between the 24th and 32nd quarters.
4.2 Stressed LRs and CPDs 
4.2.1 Stressed LR
We cannot make an econometric model to predict losses, so we use an average loss given default (LGD) to estimate losses for the entire population. This average LGD is around 40% for Munis, and 28% for general governments. It was found that the LGD did not differ materially in downturn periods, so it was found comfortable applying a standard LGD of 40% to an entity's PD.
4.3 Stressed CPD and CLR 
We can calculate the stressed cumulative PD for an issuer i in time t using our model-generated, quarterly annualized, stressed PD forecasts. One can transform cumulative forecasts to the exact tenor if desired, and use this to calculate LR in N periods can be calculated in a straightforward manner from our model-generated, quarterly annualized, stressed PD forecasts using the following equation: 	
ğ¶ğ‘ƒğ· =1âˆ’ sum of products of (big Pi to N-1) * (1âˆ’ğ‘ƒğ· ğ‘–,ğ‘¡+ğ‘—)^(1/	4)	 		
4.4 Scenarios
Moody's Analytics publishes stressed PD, LR and CPD forecasts monthly based on nine alternative economic scenario forecasts as well as regulatory-driven economic scenarios. These forecasts are taken from the Moody's Analytics forecast database. For comparison, stress under historical downturns is also provided. While BL and S1 (economic scenarios) produce more upgrades than downgrades and rightly so, S3 matches the number of downgrades seen during the Great Recession. 
5 Model monitoring plan
Moody's Analytics monitors the forecast accuracy of its models on an annual basis. If the models start to diverge, they are re-estimated. If the forecast error in an equation exceeds 1.5 standard deviations over a period of four quarters, the equation is flagged for redevelopment. Their team will examine the equation's specification to determine why it produced inaccurate forecasts and will explore alternative specifications. Moody's Analytics constantly monitors its forecast models and strives to increase their accuracy. Poorly performing equations are likely to be spotted by model developers long before these thresholds are crossed.
6 Conclusion 
In this paper the modeling methodology behind the Moody's Analytics Muni Loss Forecast models is described. It is shown how the models produce stressed PD and LR measures, which are well-suited to applications in which PDs conditioned on future, alternative states of the world are required. Moody's Analytics uses a database of nearly 50 years to create scenario-conditioned credit loss forecasts for virtually any Muni entity.


